—Important Note to the Reader and Studier of Sacred Things— 


This is not The Book of Mormon as had by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and its members at large, but a helpful study version of The Book of Mormon for those desiring to familiarize themselves with the stories, order of events, and basic doctrines taught in The Book of Mormon. 

All text is from the transcripts made by the modern-day Prophet Joseph Smith and his scribes as he translated by the gift and power of God golden plates delivered to him by an angel. Believing this to be the most important text in the history of the world, I in no way mean to deny access to the record as it was meant to be read, or as the words appeared on the ancient record. To learn more about this ancient sacred record and obtain the official edition of The Book of Mormon, visit www.mormon.org or www.lds.org, official websites of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints: the Lord’s kingdom on Earth once more.

In an attempt to uphold the integrity of the sacred text, no words have been changed from the text of The Book of Mormon. Any that exist are consequently errors in this version and not in The Book of Mormon. The largest changes from The Book of Mormon include adjustments in text layout, paragraphs instead of verses, and sections instead of chapters whose length is more comparable with chapters of non-canonical chapter books. Other changes include more modern conventions in punctuation when characters are speaking and ***[list any other changes]*** have been introduced into the text.

This version of Story of the Book of Mormon is representative of The Book of Mormon in that it takes the text of The Book of Mormon and separates long passages of doctrine or sermons given by prophets in The Book of Mormon from the dialogue about the people of The Book of Mormon and the events and situations they encounter. The beginning and largest section is the story of the text, whereas the complete doctrinal passages are in the “Complete Doctrinal Passages” section following. The order, or division is for study purposes only, and not related to the importance of the text in each section.

In seeing the story of The Book of Mormon is of little worth without the associated doctrine, the most typically highlighted verses of the lengthy doctrinal sections are included in the story. There are corresponding superscripts that will allow the reader to quickly find the associated complete doctrinal passage, should they decide to study a particular passage in more depth and in context. Alternatively, the doctrinal sections may be studied alone to make connections between different characters who taught of similar or identical doctrines.

The purpose of this book is to enhance the readers understanding of The Book of Mormon by being a transitional study book for those who may be less accustom to reading the scriptures, but read other books, and for those well versed in scripture, to use it as a study book to gain context clues for lengthy doctrinal passages and to connect and understand events, characters, and doctrines in more detail.

