Doctrinal Passages of
THE SECOND BOOK OF NEPHI

b - Jacob preaches to the people of Nephi on the words of Isaiah (approx. 2 Nephi Chapter 6-8)
	“Wherefore, after they are driven to and fro, for thus saith the angel, many shall be afflicted in the flesh, and shall not be suffered to perish, because of the prayers of the faithful; they shall be scattered, and smitten, and hated; nevertheless, the Lord will be merciful unto them, that when they shall come to the knowledge of their Redeemer, they shall be gathered together again to the lands of their inheritance. And blessed are the Gentiles, they of whom the prophet has written; for behold, if it so be that they shall repent and fight not against Zion, and do not unite themselves to that great and abominable church, they shall be saved; for the Lord God will fulfil his covenants which he has made unto his children; and for this cause the prophet has written these things.
	“Wherefore, they that fight against Zion and the covenant people of the Lord shall lick up the dust of their feet; and the people of the Lord shall not be ashamed.  For the people of the Lord are they who wait for him; for they still wait for the coming of the Messiah. And behold, according to the words of the prophet, the Messiah will set himself again the second time to recover them; wherefore, he will manifest himself unto them in power and great glory, unto the destruction of their enemies, when that day cometh when they shall believe in him; and none will he destroy that believe in him. And they that believe not in him shall be destroyed, both by fire, and by tempest, and by earthquakes, and by bloodsheds, and by pestilence, and by famine.  And they shall know that the Lord is God, the Holy One of Israel. For shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive delivered?
	“But thus saith the Lord, ‘Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered;’ for the Mighty God shall deliver his covenant people.  For thus saith the Lord, ‘I will contend with them that contendeth with thee-- And I will feed them that oppress thee, with their own flesh; and they shall be drunken with their own blood as with sweet wine; and all flesh shall know that I the Lord am thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.’
	“Yea, for thus saith the Lord, ‘Have I put thee away, or have I cast thee off forever?’  For thus saith the Lord, ‘Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement?  To whom have I put thee away, or to which of my creditors have I sold you?  Yea, to whom have I sold you?  Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away. Wherefore, when I came, there was no man; when I called, yea, there was none to answer.  O house of Israel, is my hand shortened at all that it cannot redeem, or have I no power to deliver?  Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea, I make their rivers a wilderness and their fish to stink because the waters are dried up, and they die because of thirst. I clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make sackcloth their covering. The Lord God hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season unto thee, O house of Israel.  When ye are weary he waketh morning by morning.  He waketh mine ear to hear as the learned. The Lord God hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned away back. I gave my back to the smiter, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair.  I hid not my face from shame and spitting. For the Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be confounded.  Therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed. And the Lord is near, and he justifieth me.  Who will contend with me?  Let us stand together.  Who is mine adversary?  Let him come near me, and I will smite him with the strength of my mouth. For the Lord God will help me.  And all they who shall condemn me, behold, all they shall wax old as a garment, and the moth shall eat them up. Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness and hath no light? Behold all ye that kindle fire, that compass yourselves about with sparks, walk in the light of your fire and in the sparks which ye have kindled.  This shall ye have of mine hand--ye shall lie down in sorrow.
	“Hearken unto me, ye that follow after righteousness.  Look unto the rock from whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit from whence ye are digged. Look unto Abraham, your father, and unto Sarah, she that bare you; for I called him alone, and blessed him. For the Lord shall comfort Zion, he will comfort all her waste places; and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord.  Joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody. Hearken unto me, my people; and give ear unto me, O my nation; for a law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judgment to rest for a light for the people. My righteousness is near; my salvation is gone forth, and mine arm shall judge the people.  The isles shall wait upon me, and on mine arm shall they trust. Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath; for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment; and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner.  But my salvation shall be forever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished.
	“Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart I have written my law, fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings. For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool.  But my righteousness shall be forever, and my salvation from generation to generation.
	“Awake, awake!  Put on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake as in the ancient days.  Art thou not he that hath cut Rahab, and wounded the dragon? Art thou not he who hath dried the sea, the waters of the great deep; that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed to pass over? Therefore, the redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with singing unto Zion; and everlasting joy and holiness shall be upon their heads; and they shall obtain gladness and joy; sorrow and mourning shall flee away. I am he; yea, I am he that comforteth you.  Behold, who art thou, that thou shouldst be afraid of man, who shall die, and of the son of man, who shall be made like unto grass? And forgettest the Lord thy maker, that hath stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth, and hast feared continually every day, because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy?  And where is the fury of the oppressor? The captive exile hasteneth, that he may be loosed, and that he should not die in the pit, nor that his bread should fail. But I am the Lord thy God, whose waves roared; the Lord of Hosts is my name. And I have put my words in thy mouth, and have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens and lay the foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, ‘Behold, thou art my people.’
	“Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the hand of the Lord the cup of his fury--thou hast drunken the dregs of the cup of trembling wrung out-- And none to guide her among all the sons she hath brought forth; neither that taketh her by the hand, of all the sons she hath brought up. These two sons are come unto thee, who shall be sorry for thee--thy desolation and destruction, and the famine and the sword--and by whom shall I comfort thee? Thy sons have fainted, save these two; they lie at the head of all the streets; as a wild bull in a net, they are full of the fury of the Lord, the rebuke of thy God.
	“Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, and not with wine: Thus saith thy Lord, the Lord and thy God pleadeth the cause of his people, ‘Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou shalt no more drink it again. But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee; who have said to thy soul: Bow down, that we may go over--and thou hast laid thy body as the ground and as the street to them that went over.’
	“Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city; for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean. Shake thyself from the dust; arise, sit down, O Jerusalem; loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion.”

c - Nephi proceeds to write many of the words of Isaiah (approx. 2 Nephi Chapter 12-24)

	And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into pruning-hooks--nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. O house of Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the light of the Lord; yea, come, for ye have all gone astray, every one to his wicked ways. Therefore, O Lord, thou hast forsaken thy people, the house of Jacob, because they be replenished from the east, and hearken unto soothsayers like the Philistines, and they please themselves in the children of strangers.
	Their land also is full of silver and gold, neither is there any end of their treasures; their land is also full of horses, neither is there any end of their chariots. Their land is also full of idols; they worship the work of their own hands, that which their own fingers have made. And the mean man boweth not down, and the great man humbleth himself not, therefore, forgive him not.
 	O ye wicked ones, enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, for the fear of the Lord and the glory of his majesty shall smite thee. And it shall come to pass that the lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. For the day of the Lord of Hosts soon cometh upon all nations, yea, upon every one; yea, upon the proud and lofty, and upon every one who is lifted up, and he shall be brought low.
	Yea, and the day of the Lord shall come upon all the cedars of Lebanon, for they are high and lifted up; and upon all the oaks of Bashan; And upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills, and upon all the nations which are lifted up, and upon every people; And upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall; And upon all the ships of the sea, and upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all pleasant pictures. And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low; and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. And the idols he shall utterly abolish. And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for the fear of the Lord shall come upon them and the glory of his majesty shall smite them, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.
	In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which he hath made for himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats; To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for the fear of the Lord shall come upon them and the majesty of his glory shall smite them, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth. Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils; for wherein is he to be accounted of?

Chapter 13

 1 For behold, the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, doth take away from
Jerusalem, and from Judah, the stay and the staff, the whole
staff of bread, and the whole stay of water--

 2 The mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, and the
prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient;

 3 The captain of fifty, and the honorable man, and the
counselor, and the cunning artificer, and the eloquent orator.

 4 And I will give children unto them to be their princes, and
babes shall rule over them.

 5 And the people shall be oppressed, every one by another, and
every one by his neighbor; the child shall behave himself proudly
against the ancient, and the base against the honorable.

 6 When a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his
father, and shall say: Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and
let not this ruin come under thy hand--

 7 In that day shall he swear, saying: I will not be a healer;
for in my house there is neither bread nor clothing; make me not
a ruler of the people.

 8 For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen, because their
tongues and their doings have been against the Lord, to provoke
the eyes of his glory.

 9 The show of their countenance doth witness against them, and
doth declare their sin to be even as Sodom, and they cannot hide
it.  Wo unto their souls, for they have rewarded evil unto
themselves!

 10 Say unto the righteous that it is well with them; for they
shall eat the fruit of their doings.

 11 Wo unto the wicked, for they shall perish; for the reward of
their hands shall be upon them!

 12 And my people, children are their oppressors, and women rule
over them.  O my people, they who lead thee cause thee to err and
destroy the way of thy paths.

 13 The Lord standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the
people.

 14 The Lord will enter into judgment with the ancients of his
people and the princes thereof; for ye have eaten up the vineyard
and the spoil of the poor in your houses.

 15 What mean ye?  Ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the
faces of the poor, saith the Lord God of Hosts.

 16 Moreover, the Lord saith: Because the daughters of Zion are
haughty, and walk with stretched-forth necks and wanton eyes,
walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their
feet--

 17 Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the
head of the daughters of Zion, and the Lord will discover their
secret parts.

 18 In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their
tinkling ornaments, and cauls, and round tires like the moon;

 19 The chains and the bracelets, and the mufflers;

 20 The bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the
headbands, and the tablets, and the ear-rings;

 21 The rings, and nose jewels;

 22 The changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the
wimples, and the crisping-pins;

 23 The glasses, and the fine linen, and hoods, and the veils.

 24 And it shall come to pass, instead of sweet smell there shall
be stink; and instead of a girdle, a rent; and instead of well
set hair, baldness; and instead of a stomacher, a girding of
sackcloth; burning instead of beauty.

 25 Thy men shall fall by the sword and thy mighty in the war.

 26 And her gates shall lament and mourn; and she shall be
desolate, and shall sit upon the ground.

Chapter 14

 1 And in that day, seven women shall take hold of one man,
saying: We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel; only
let us be called by thy name to take away our reproach.

 2 In that day shall the branch of the Lord be beautiful and
glorious; the fruit of the earth excellent and comely to them
that are escaped of Israel.

 3 And it shall come to pass, they that are left in Zion and
remain in Jerusalem shall be called holy, every one that is
written among the living in Jerusalem--

 4 When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the
daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem
from the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment and by the
spirit of burning.

 5 And the Lord will create upon every dwelling-place of mount
Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day and the
shining of a flaming fire by night; for upon all the glory of
Zion shall be a defence.

 6 And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime
from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and a covert from storm
and from rain.

Chapter 15

 1 And then will I sing to my well-beloved a song of my beloved,
touching his vineyard.  My well-beloved hath a vineyard in a very
fruitful hill.

 2 And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and
planted it with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst
of it, and also made a wine-press therein; and he looked that it
should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.

 3 And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge,
I pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard.

 4 What could have been done more to my vineyard that I have not
done in it?  Wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth
grapes it brought forth wild grapes.

 5 And now go to; I will tell you what I will do to my
vineyard--I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be
eaten up; and I will break down the wall thereof, and it shall be
trodden down;

 6 And I will lay it waste; it shall not be pruned nor digged;
but there shall come up briers and thorns; I will also command
the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.

 7 For the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the house of Israel,
and the men of Judah his pleasant plant; and he looked for
judgment, and behold, oppression; for righteousness, but behold,
a cry.

 8 Wo unto them that join house to house, till there can be no
place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth!

 9 In mine ears, said the Lord of Hosts, of a truth many houses
shall be desolate, and great and fair cities without inhabitant.

 10 Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed
of a homer shall yield an ephah.

 11 Wo unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may
follow strong drink, that continue until night, and wine inflame
them!

 12 And the harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe, and wine
are in their feasts; but they regard not the work of the Lord,
neither consider the operation of his hands.

 13 Therefore, my people are gone into captivity, because they
have no knowledge; and their honorable men are famished, and
their multitude dried up with thirst.

 14 Therefore, hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth
without measure; and their glory, and their multitude, and their
pomp, and he that rejoiceth, shall descend into it.

 15 And the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man
shall be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled.

 16 But the Lord of Hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and God
that is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness.

 17 Then shall the lambs feed after their manner, and the waste
places of the fat ones shall strangers eat.

 18 Wo unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin
as it were with a cart rope;

 19 That say: Let him make speed, hasten his work, that we may
see it; and let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh
and come, that we may know it.

 20 Wo unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for
sweet, and sweet for bitter!

 21 Wo unto the wise in their own eyes and prudent in their own
sight!

 22 Wo unto the mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to
mingle strong drink;

 23 Who justify the wicked for reward, and take away the
righteousness of the righteous from him!

 24 Therefore, as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame
consumeth the chaff, their root shall be rottenness, and their
blossoms shall go up as dust; because they have cast away the law
of the Lord of Hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One of
Israel.

 25 Therefore, is the anger of the Lord kindled against his
people, and he hath stretched forth his hand against them, and
hath smitten them; and the hills did tremble, and their carcasses
were torn in the midst of the streets.  For all this his anger is
not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

 26 And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and
will hiss unto them from the end of the earth; and behold, they
shall come with speed swiftly; none shall be weary nor stumble
among them.

 27 None shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of
their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken;

 28 Whose arrows shall be sharp, and all their bows bent, and
their horses' hoofs shall be counted like flint, and their wheels
like a whirlwind, their roaring like a lion.

 29 They shall roar like young lions; yea, they shall roar, and
lay hold of the prey, and shall carry away safe, and none shall
deliver.

 30 And in that day they shall roar against them like the roaring
of the sea; and if they look unto the land, behold, darkness and
sorrow, and the light is darkened in the heavens thereof.

Chapter 16

 1 In the year that king Uzziah died, I saw also the Lord sitting
upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the
temple.

 2 Above it stood the seraphim; each one had six wings; with
twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet,
and with twain he did fly.

 3 And one cried unto another, and said: Holy, holy, holy, is the
Lord of Hosts; the whole earth is full of his glory.

 4 And the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that
cried, and the house was filled with smoke.

 5 Then said I: Wo is unto me!  for I am undone; because I am a
man of unclean lips; and I dwell in the midst of a people of
unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of
Hosts.

 6 Then flew one of the seraphim unto me, having a live coal in
his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar;

 7 And he laid it upon my mouth, and said: Lo, this has touched
thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged.

 8 Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying: Whom shall I send,
and who will go for us?  Then I said: Here am I; send me.

 9 And he said: Go and tell this people--Hear ye indeed, but they
understood not; and see ye indeed, but they perceived not.

 10 Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy,
and shut their eyes--lest they see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and understand with their heart, and be converted and
be healed.

 11 Then said I: Lord, how long?  And he said: Until the cities
be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the
land be utterly desolate;

 12 And the Lord have removed men far away, for there shall be a
great forsaking in the midst of the land.

 13 But yet there shall be a tenth, and they shall return, and
shall be eaten, as a teil-tree, and as an oak whose substance is
in them when they cast their leaves; so the holy seed shall be
the substance thereof.

Chapter 17

 1 And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the
son of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin, king of Syria, and
Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up toward
Jerusalem to war against it, but could not prevail against it.

 2 And it was told the house of David, saying: Syria is
confederate with Ephraim.  And his heart was moved, and the heart
of his people, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind.

 3 Then said the Lord unto Isaiah: Go forth now to meet Ahaz,
thou and Shearjashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the
upper pool in the highway of the fuller's field;

 4 And say unto him: Take heed, and be quiet; fear not, neither
be faint-hearted for the two tails of these smoking firebrands,
for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the son of
Remaliah.

 5 Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have taken
evil counsel against thee, saying:

 6 Let us go up against Judah and vex it, and let us make a
breach therein for us, and set a king in the midst of it, yea,
the son of Tabeal.

 7 Thus saith the Lord God: It shall not stand, neither shall it
come to pass.

 8 For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus,
Rezin; and within three score and five years shall Ephraim be
broken that it be not a people.

 9 And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is
Remaliah's son.  If ye will not believe surely ye shall not be
established.

 10 Moreover, the Lord spake again unto Ahaz, saying:

 11 Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy God; ask it either in the
depths, or in the heights above.

 12 But Ahaz said: I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord.

 13 And he said: Hear ye now, O house of David; is it a small
thing for you to weary men, but will ye weary my God also?

 14 Therefore, the Lord himself shall give you a sign--Behold, a
virgin shall conceive, and shall bear a son, and shall call his
name Immanuel.

 15 Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the
evil and to choose the good.

 16 For before the child shall know to refuse the evil and choose
the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both
her kings.

 17 The Lord shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon
thy father's house, days that have not come from the day that
Ephraim departed from Judah, the king of Assyria.

 18 And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall
hiss for the fly that is in the uttermost part of Egypt, and for
the bee that is in the land of Assyria.

 19 And they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the
desolate valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all
thorns, and upon all bushes.

 20 In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that is
hired, by them beyond the river, by the king of Assyria, the
head, and the hair of the feet; and it shall also consume the
beard.

 21 And it shall come to pass in that day, a man shall nourish a
young cow and two sheep;

 22 And it shall come to pass, for the abundance of milk they
shall give he shall eat butter; for butter and honey shall every
one eat that is left in the land.

 23 And it shall come to pass in that day, every place shall be,
where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings,
which shall be for briers and thorns.

 24 With arrows and with bows shall men come thither, because all
the land shall become briers and thorns.

 25 And all hills that shall be digged with the mattock, there
shall not come thither the fear of briers and thorns; but it
shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and the treading of
lesser cattle.

Chapter 18

 1 Moreover, the word of the Lord said unto me: Take thee a great
roll, and write in it with a man's pen, concerning
Maher-shalal-hash-baz.

 2 And I took unto me faithful witnesses to record, Uriah the
priest, and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.

 3 And I went unto the prophetess; and she conceived and bare a
son.  Then said the Lord to me: Call his name,
Maher-shalal-hash-baz.

 4 For behold, the child shall not have knowledge to cry, My
father, and my mother, before the riches of Damascus and the
spoil of Samaria shall be taken away before the king of Assyria.

 5 The Lord spake also unto me again, saying:

 6 Forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloah that
go softly, and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah's son;

 7 Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth up upon them the
waters of the river, strong and many, even the king of Assyria
and all his glory; and he shall come up over all his channels,
and go over all his banks.

 8 And he shall pass through Judah; he shall overflow and go
over, he shall reach even to the neck; and the stretching out of
his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel.

 9 Associate yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in
pieces; and give ear all ye of far countries; gird yourselves,
and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall
be broken in pieces.

 10 Take counsel together, and it shall come to naught; speak the
word, and it shall not stand; for God is with us.

 11 For the Lord spake thus to me with a strong hand, and
instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this people,
saying:

 12 Say ye not, A confederacy, to all to whom this people shall
say, A confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid.

 13 Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear,
and let him be your dread.

 14 And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of
stumbling, and for a rock of offense to both the houses of
Israel, for a gin and a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

 15 And many among them shall stumble and fall, and be broken,
and be snared, and be taken.

 16 Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples.

 17 And I will wait upon the Lord, that hideth his face from the
house of Jacob, and I will look for him.

 18 Behold, I and the children whom the Lord hath given me are
for signs and for wonders in Israel from the Lord of Hosts, which
dwelleth in Mount Zion.

 19 And when they shall say unto you: Seek unto them that have
familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep and mutter--should
not a people seek unto their God for the living to hear from the
dead?

 20 To the law and to the testimony; and if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.

 21 And they shall pass through it hardly bestead and hungry; and
it shall come to pass that when they shall be hungry, they shall
fret themselves, and curse their king and their God, and look
upward.

 22 And they shall look unto the earth and behold trouble, and
darkness, dimness of anguish, and shall be driven to darkness.

Chapter 19

 1 Nevertheless, the dimness shall not be such as was in her
vexation, when at first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun,
and the land of Naphtali, and afterwards did more grievously
afflict by the way of the Red Sea beyond Jordan in Galilee of the
nations.

 2 The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light;
they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them
hath the light shined.

 3 Thou hast multiplied the nation, and increased the joy--they
joy before thee according to the joy in harvest, and as men
rejoice when they divide the spoil.

 4 For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden, and the staff of
his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor.

 5 For every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and
garments rolled in blood; but this shall be with burning and fuel
of fire.

 6 For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given; and the
government shall be upon his shoulder; and his name shall be
called, Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty God, The Everlasting
Father, The Prince of Peace.

 7 Of the increase of government and peace there is no end, upon
the throne of David, and upon his kingdom to order it, and to
establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth, even
forever.  The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this.

 8 The Lord sent his word unto Jacob and it hath lighted upon
Israel.

 9 And all the people shall know, even Ephraim and the
inhabitants of Samaria, that say in the pride and stoutness of
heart:

 10 The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn
stones; the sycamores are cut down, but we will change them into
cedars.

 11 Therefore the Lord shall set up the adversaries of Rezin
against him, and join his enemies together;

 12 The Syrians before and the Philistines behind; and they shall
devour Israel with open mouth.  For all this his anger is not
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

 13 For the people turneth not unto him that smiteth them,
neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts.

 14 Therefore will the Lord cut off from Israel head and tail,
branch and rush in one day.

 15 The ancient, he is the head; and the prophet that teacheth
lies, he is the tail.

 16 For the leaders of this people cause them to err; and they
that are led of them are destroyed.

 17 Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young men,
neither shall have mercy on their fatherless and widows; for
every one of them is a hypocrite and an evildoer, and every mouth
speaketh folly.  For all this his anger is not turned away, but
his hand is stretched out still.

 18 For wickedness burneth as the fire; it shall devour the
briers and thorns, and shall kindle in the thickets of the
forests, and they shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke.

 19 Through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts is the land darkened,
and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire; no man shall
spare his brother.

 20 And he shall snatch on the right hand and be hungry; and he
shall eat on the left hand and they shall not be satisfied; they
shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm--

 21 Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh; they together shall
be against Judah.  For all this his anger is not turned away, but
his hand is stretched out still.

Chapter 20

 1 Wo unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write
grievousness which they have prescribed;

 2 To turn away the needy from judgment, and to take away the
right from the poor of my people, that widows may be their prey,
and that they may rob the fatherless!

 3 And what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the
desolation which shall come from far?  to whom will ye flee for
help?  and where will ye leave your glory?

 4 Without me they shall bow down under the prisoners, and they
shall fall under the slain.  For all this his anger is not turned
away, but his hand is stretched out still.

 5 O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand
is their indignation.

 6 I will send him against a hypocritical nation, and against the
people of my wrath will I give him a charge to take the spoil,
and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the
streets.

 7 Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so;
but in his heart it is to destroy and cut off nations not a few.

 8 For he saith: Are not my princes altogether kings?

 9 Is not Calno as Carchemish?  Is not Hamath as Arpad?  Is not
Samaria as Damascus?

 10 As my hand hath founded the kingdoms of the idols, and whose
graven images did excel them of Jerusalem and of Samaria;

 11 Shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and her idols, so do
to Jerusalem and to her idols?

 12 Wherefore it shall come to pass that when the Lord hath
performed his whole work upon Mount Zion and upon Jerusalem, I
will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of Assyria,
and the glory of his high looks.

 13 For he saith: By the strength of my hand and by my wisdom I
have done these things; for I am prudent; and I have moved the
borders of the people, and have robbed their treasures, and I
have put down the inhabitants like a valiant man;

 14 And my hand hath found as a nest the riches of the people;
and as one gathereth eggs that are left have I gathered all the
earth; and there was none that moved the wing, or opened the
mouth, or peeped.

 15 Shall the ax boast itself against him that heweth therewith? 
Shall the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it?  As if
the rod should shake itself against them that lift it up, or as
if the staff should lift up itself as if it were no wood!

 16 Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, send among his
fat ones, leanness; and under his glory he shall kindle a burning
like the burning of a fire.

 17 And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One
for a flame, and shall burn and shall devour his thorns and his
briers in one day;

 18 And shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his
fruitful field, both soul and body; and they shall be as when a
standard-bearer fainteth.

 19 And the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few, that a
child may write them.

 20 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of
Israel, and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no
more again stay upon him that smote them, but shall stay upon the
Lord, the Holy One of Israel, in truth.

 21 The remnant shall return, yea, even the remnant of Jacob,
unto the mighty God.

 22 For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a
remnant of them shall return; the consumption decreed shall
overflow with righteousness.

 23 For the Lord God of Hosts shall make a consumption, even
determined in all the land.

 24 Therefore, thus saith the Lord God of Hosts: O my people that
dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian; he shall smite
thee with a rod, and shall lift up his staff against thee, after
the manner of Egypt.

 25 For yet a very little while, and the indignation shall cease,
and mine anger in their destruction.

 26 And the Lord of Hosts shall stir up a scourge for him
according to the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb; and as
his rod was upon the sea so shall he lift it up after the manner
of Egypt.

 27 And it shall come to pass in that day that his burden shall
be taken away from off thy shoulder, and his yoke from off thy
neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing.

 28 He is come to Aiath, he is passed to Migron; at Michmash he
hath laid up his carriages.

 29 They are gone over the passage; they have taken up their
lodging at Geba; Ramath is afraid; Gibeah of Saul is fled.

 30 Lift up the voice, O daughter of Gallim; cause it to be heard
unto Laish, O poor Anathoth.

 31 Madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of Gebim gather
themselves to flee.

 32 As yet shall he remain at Nob that day; he shall shake his
hand against the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of
Jerusalem.

 33 Behold, the Lord, the Lord of Hosts shall lop the bough with
terror; and the high ones of stature shall be hewn down; and the
haughty shall be humbled.

 34 And he shall cut down the thickets of the forests with iron,
and Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one.

Chapter 21

 1 And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and
a branch shall grow out of his roots.

 2 And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of
wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the
spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord;

 3 And shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the
Lord; and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither
reprove after the hearing of his ears.

 4 But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove
with equity for the meek of the earth; and he shall smite the
earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips
shall he slay the wicked.

 5 And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and
faithfulness the girdle of his reins.

 6 The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall
lie down with the kid, and the calf and the young lion and
fatling together; and a little child shall lead them.

 7 And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall
lie down together; and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

 8 And the suckling child shall play on the hole of the asp, and
the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice's den.

 9 They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, for
the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the sea.

 10 And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall
stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek;
and his rest shall be glorious.

 11 And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall set
his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his
people which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and
from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and
from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.

 12 And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall
assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the
dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.

 13 The envy of Ephraim also shall depart, and the adversaries of
Judah shall be cut off; Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah
shall not vex Ephraim.

 14 But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines
towards the west; they shall spoil them of the east together;
they shall lay their hand upon Edom and Moab; and the children of
Ammon shall obey them.

 15 And the Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian
sea; and with his mighty wind he shall shake his hand over the
river, and shall smite it in the seven streams, and make men go
over dry shod.

 16 And there shall be a highway for the remnant of his people
which shall be left, from Assyria, like as it was to Israel in
the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt.

Chapter 22

 1 And in that day thou shalt say: O Lord, I will praise thee;
though thou wast angry with me thine anger is turned away, and
thou comfortedst me.

 2 Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid;
for the Lord JEHOVAH is my strength and my song; he also has
become my salvation.

 3 Therefore, with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of
salvation.

 4 And in that day shall ye say: Praise the Lord, call upon his
name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that his
name is exalted.

 5 Sing unto the Lord; for he hath done excellent things; this is
known in all the earth.

 6 Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion; for great is the
Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.

Chapter 23

 1 The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see.

 2 Lift ye up a banner upon the high mountain, exalt the voice
unto them, shake the hand, that they may go into the gates of the
nobles.

 3 I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my
mighty ones, for mine anger is not upon them that rejoice in my
highness.

 4 The noise of the multitude in the mountains like as of a great
people, a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered
together, the Lord of Hosts mustereth the hosts of the battle.

 5 They come from a far country, from the end of heaven, yea, the
Lord, and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole
land.

 6 Howl ye, for the day of the Lord is at hand; it shall come as
a destruction from the Almighty.

 7 Therefore shall all hands be faint, every man's heart shall
melt;

 8 And they shall be afraid; pangs and sorrows shall take hold of
them; they shall be amazed one at another; their faces shall be
as flames.

 9 Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and
fierce anger, to lay the land desolate; and he shall destroy the
sinners thereof out of it.

 10 For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall
not give their light; the sun shall be darkened in his going
forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine.

 11 And I will punish the world for evil, and the wicked for
their iniquity; I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease,
and will lay down the haughtiness of the terrible.

 12 I will make a man more precious than fine gold; even a man
than the golden wedge of Ophir.

 13 Therefore, I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall
remove out of her place, in the wrath of the Lord of Hosts, and
in the day of his fierce anger.

 14 And it shall be as the chased roe, and as a sheep that no man
taketh up; and they shall every man turn to his own people, and
flee every one into his own land.

 15 Every one that is proud shall be thrust through; yea, and
every one that is joined to the wicked shall fall by the sword.

 16 Their children, also shall be dashed to pieces before their
eyes; their houses shall be spoiled and their wives ravished.

 17 Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall
not regard silver and gold, nor shall they delight in it.

 18 Their bows shall also dash the young men to pieces, and they
shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eyes shall not
spare children.

 19 And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the
Chaldees' excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah.

 20 It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in
from generation to generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch
tent there; neither shall the shepherds make their fold there.

 21 But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their
houses shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell
there, and satyrs shall dance there.

 22 And the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their
desolate houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces; and her
time is near to come, and her day shall not be prolonged.  For I
will destroy her speedily; yea, for I will be merciful unto my
people, but the wicked shall perish.

Chapter 24

 1 For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose
Israel, and set them in their own land; and the strangers shall
be joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob.

 2 And the people shall take them and bring them to their place;
yea, from far unto the ends of the earth; and they shall return
to their lands of promise.  And the house of Israel shall possess
them, and the land of the Lord shall be for servants and
handmaids; and they shall take them captives unto whom they were
captives; and they shall rule over their oppressors.

 3 And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall give
thee rest, from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard
bondage wherein thou wast made to serve.

 4 And it shall come to pass in that day, that thou shalt take up
this proverb against the king of Babylon, and say: How hath the
oppressor ceased, the golden city ceased!

 5 The Lord hath broken the staff of the wicked, the scepters of
the rulers.

 6 He who smote the people in wrath with a continual stroke, he
that ruled the nations in anger, is persecuted, and none
hindereth.

 7 The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet; they break forth
into singing.

 8 Yea, the fir-trees rejoice at thee, and also the cedars of
Lebanon, saying: Since thou art laid down no feller is come up
against us.

 9 Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy
coming; it stirreth up the dead for thee, even all the chief ones
of the earth; it hath raised up from their thrones all the kings
of the nations.

 10 All they shall speak and say unto thee: Art thou also become
weak as we?  Art thou become like unto us?

 11 Thy pomp is brought down to the grave; the noise of thy viols
is not heard; the worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover
thee.

 12 How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the
morning!  Art thou cut down to the ground, which did weaken the
nations!

 13 For thou hast said in thy heart: I will ascend into heaven, I
will exalt my throne above the stars of God; I will sit also upon
the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north;

 14 I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like
the Most High.

 15 Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the
pit.

 16 They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and shall
consider thee, and shall say: Is this the man that made the earth
to tremble, that did shake kingdoms?

 17 And made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities
thereof, and opened not the house of his prisoners?

 18 All the kings of the nations, yea, all of them, lie in glory,
every one of them in his own house.

 19 But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch,
and the remnant of those that are slain, thrust through with a
sword, that go down to the stones of the pit; as a carcass
trodden under feet.

 20 Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou
hast destroyed thy land and slain thy people; the seed of
evil-doers shall never be renowned.

 21 Prepare slaughter for his children for the iniquities of
their fathers, that they do not rise, nor possess the land, nor
fill the face of the world with cities.

 22 For I will rise up against them, saith the Lord of Hosts, and
cut off from Babylon the name, and remnant, and son, and nephew,
saith the Lord.

 23 I will also make it a possession for the bittern, and pools
of water; and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction,
saith the Lord of Hosts.

 24 The Lord of Hosts hath sworn, saying: Surely as I have
thought, so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, so
shall it stand--

 25 That I will bring the Assyrian in my land, and upon my
mountains tread him under foot; then shall his yoke depart from
off them, and his burden depart from off their shoulders.

 26 This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth;
and this is the hand that is stretched out upon all nations.

 27 For the Lord of Hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul? 
And his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?

 28 In the year that king Ahaz died was this burden.

 29 Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina, because the rod of him
that smote thee is broken; for out of the serpent's root shall
come forth a cockatrice, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying
serpent.

 30 And the first-born of the poor shall feed, and the needy
shall lie down in safety; and I will kill thy root with famine,
and he shall slay thy remnant.

 31 Howl, O gate; cry, O city; thou, whole Palestina, art
dissolved; for there shall come from the north a smoke, and none
shall be alone in his appointed times.

 32 What shall then answer the messengers of the nations?  That
the Lord hath founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall
trust in it.


